## Lesson 5

### 1

There are many derivatives formed from verbs and when we have learned how to form these we shall have a greatly increased vocabulary at our disposal. These derivatives are formed either from the present stem or the perfect stem.

### 2 

To the present stem are added the suffixes `-bil`, `-da`, and `-ment`.

### 3

The suffix `-bil` expresses possibility. Verbs in `-er` add `-ibil`.

| Verb | Definition | Derivative |
| --- | --- | --- |
| navigar | to navigate | navigabil |
| notar | to note | notabil |
| audir | to hear | audibil |
| picter | to paint | pictibil |

### 4 

The suffix `-da` expresses activity in duration; verbs in `-er` add `-ida`.

| Verb | Definition | Derivative |
| --- | --- | --- |
| navigar | to navigate | navigabil |
| notar | to note | notabil |
| audir | to hear | audibil |
| picter | to paint | pictibil |

### 5

The suffix `-ment` expresses the concrete result of an action.

> mover, movement. armar, armament. assortir, assortiment.

Note that verbs in `-er` with a vowel preceding lose the `-e`.

> arguer, argument.

### 6

The perfect stem is found by what is known as the "[Rule of de Wahl](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/De_Wahl%27s_rule)". We cut off the `-r` of infinitive or `-er` from verbs ending in this way. Then :

a) If we are left with a vowel, add `-t`.

b) If we are left with a `-d` or `-r` change this letter to `-s`.

c) In all other cases what we have left is the perfect stem. To the perfect stem are added the suffixes `-ion`, `-iv`, `-ura`, `-or`, `-ori`.

### 7

These rules are seen in the following examples :

| Verb | Derivative | 
| --- | --- |
| administrar | administrat-ion, -iv, -or, -ori | 
| decider | decis-ion, -iv | 
| currer (to run) | curs-iv | 
| instructer | instruct-ion, -iv, -or, -ori | 
| crear | creat-ura, -ion, -iv, -or, -ori | 

### 8 

The suffix `-ion` expresses action or the place of the action.

> separar, separation. observar, observation. divider, division. prohibir, prohibition. posir (to put, place), position.

### 9

The suffix `-ura` denotes the concrete result of the action.

> picter, pictura. mixter, mixtura. pleser, plesura. rupter (to break), ruptura. dictar (to dictate), dictatura (dictatorship).

### 10

The suffix `-iv` forms adjectives with the meaning "that which is".

> decorar, decorativ. adherer, adhesiv. afirmar, afirmativ. prohibir, prohibitiv.

### 11

The noun-suffix `-ie` is often added to the present participles of static verbs to form abstract nouns indicating a state.

> esser, essentie. consister, consistentie. perseverar, perseverantie.

### 12

It will be seen that the suffixes `-ntie`, `-ion`, `-ment`, `-ura` shade into each other, the latter being the more concrete. English usage will nearly always see you through.

### 13

Exercise.

> Li audition evenit in li teatre u mult persones esset. Yo opine que li navigation es un arte. Ella condamnat li spíritu competitiv. Noi va competir con vos in li observantie del regules.


See more here: [https://occidental-lang.com/derive-from-verb/](https://occidental-lang.com/derive-from-verb/)